# 🐻 🎩 "Bears Will Be Boys" Data 

This folder contains data used in *The Pudding* essay **[“Bears Will Be Boys,”](https://pudding.cool/2025/07/kids-books/)** which explores how gender is assigned to anthropomorphized animals.

We share a curated dataset of animals featured in popular children’s picture books as well as animal stories written by 1.3k+ participants. For this project, we also generated animals stories with OpenAI’s GPT-4o. We did not include this data source in our essay, but we share it here.

---

## Datasets

### 1. `kids-book-animals.csv`
A dataset of 821 anthropomorphized animal characters in widely read English-language picture books—only if referenced as she/her, he/him, it, or with a gendered honorific (Ms., Mr.) or familial role (mother, brother). This dataset includes every appearance of an animal character from our selection of popular picture books, including repeat appearances.

**Columns:**
- `goodreads_link`: Link to the book’s Goodreads page  
- `title`: Title of the book  
- `author`: Author name 
- `animal`: Specific animal (e.g., bear, cat)  
- `animal_group`: Generalized animal category  
- `pronoun`: Gendered pronoun used (he/him, she/her, it)  
- `pub_year`: Year of publication  
- `pub_date`: Full publication date (if available)  
- `decade`: Decade of publication  
- `decade_category`: Pre-1950, or decade
- `num_ratings`: Total number of Goodreads ratings for book as of data collection in 2024
-  `avg_ratings`: Average rating (1-5 stars) across all Goodreads ratings for book as of data collection in 2024
- `num_reviews`: Total number of Goodreads reviews for book as of data collection in 2024
- `book_cover_image`: Link to book cover  
- `description`: Goodreads description of the book  
- `publisher`: Publisher name  
- `ISBN`: Identifier for the book (edition aggregated by Goodreads)

---

### 2. `survey-animal-stories.csv`
Responses from more than 1.3k participants who completed the following prompt as part of a *Pudding* survey in spring 2025:
>In the 1980s, there was a study that produced surprising results about our predictive tendencies. We’re conducting a similar study today. Instructions: Complete the line below. What did the bear do? Your response can be up to three sentences.  
> *And then the bear said, “I must go to the river.” Upon arriving…*  

We randomly swapped in one of seven animals: bear, bird, cat, pig, duck, mouse, or dog.
The survey was shared on social media and through *The Pudding*'s newsletter.

**Columns:**
- `animal`: Animal shown in the prompt  
- `pronoun`: Pronoun used by respondent (she, he, it, they, NaN if no pronouns) 
- `response`: Story continuation  
- `age`: Age of respondent (optional)  
- `gender`: Gender of respondent (optional)

---

### 3. `chatgpt-animal-stories.csv`
A dataset of 2.8k story continuations generated by GPT-4o in response to the prompt:  
>In the 1980s, there was a study that produced surprising results about our predictive tendencies. We’re conducting a similar study today. Instructions: Complete the line below. What did the bear do? Your response can be up to three sentences.  
> *And then the bear said, “I must go to the river.” Upon arriving…*  

We randomly swapped in one of seven animals: bear, bird, cat, pig, duck, mouse, or dog.

**Columns:**
- `model`: Model used (GPT-4o)  
- `prompt`: Prompt given  
- `animal`: Animal in the prompt (e.g., bear, cat, duck)  
- `pronoun`: Pronoun used (she, he, it, they, NaN if no pronouns) 
- `response`: Full model-generated story  
- `temperature`: Temperature setting used (0, 0.5, 1, 1.5)  
- `date`: Date of generation  
- `full_date`: Full timestamp

---

## Methods

### How did we select these books?

We identified ~30 popular children’s books with anthropomorphic animals for every decade since 1950, plus a catch-all category for everything before 1950.

To do so, we first compiled a general dataset of English-language picture books that have been popular in the 21st century. We collected information about books that were [tagged as a “picture book”](https://www.goodreads.com/shelf/show/picture-books) the most times or included in a [list of well-known picture books](https://www.goodreads.com/list/show/107582) on Goodreads. We added picture books that have appeared on the [_New York Times_ bestseller list](https://www.nytimes.com/books/best-sellers/picture-books/) for Children’s Picture Books or picture books that were tagged as “animals” in the [Children’s Book Database](https://dlp.lib.miamioh.edu/picturebook/) at Miami University.

To find picture books that specifically feature animals, we selected any book that had “animals” as one of its top Goodreads tags; any book that was tagged as “animals” in the Children’s Book Database; or any book that GPT-4o identified as featuring animals (after being prompted with its title, author, and description). We manually evaluated every book and every representation of animals, so we used this approach to reduce a large dataset to a manageable size. We excluded anthologies and collections, like Grimm’s Fairy Tales.

We then ranked the remaining books by number of Goodreads ratings and selected the top ~30 books from every decade category.

### How did we identify gender?

We identified the gender of animals based on how they were referenced in the text: with feminine (she/her), masculine (he/him), or neutral (it/its, they/them) pronouns; with a gendered honorific (e.g., Mr., Ms.) or familial role (e.g., brother, mother); or simply by their animal name (e.g., the frog) or a character name. In this dataset, we only share animal characters referenced as she/her, he/him, it/its, or with a gendered honorific (Ms., Mr.) or familial role (mother, brother).

### What counts as anthropomorphic and “important to the story”?

We include animal characters that meet the following criteria: 1) the animal exists (or existed) in the real world; 2a) the animal is an active subject at some point in the book; 2b) the animal has dialogue or plays a role in the story; 3) the animal has at least one anthropomorphic quality (e.g., clothing, speech, upright walking, jobs, personality, uses tools, facial expressions, complex relationships, cultural behavior, lives in a house, etc.). We exclude animals that were only referred to as a group or in a plural form (e.g, “… said the birds”, “the squirrels jumped”). 

